Add SCDF scaling overview, manual scaling recipe and autoscaling recipe (#172)
spring-io/dataflow.spring.io: content/documentation/pages/5-feature-guides/1-streams/7-scaling.md

---
path: 'feature-guides/streams/scaling/'
title: 'Scaling'

> description: 'Stream scaling with Spring Cloud Data Flow'

Reviewer: > 'Scaling streaming data pipeline with Spring Cloud Data Flow'

---

# Scaling

Let's start with a general definition of scalability, the types, and why it is useful.

[Scalability](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalability) is the ability of a system to cope with increased load by adding resources. In Distributed Systems the ability to add resources such as CPUs, memory and storage to the existing nodes is known as [vertical scaling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalability#Vertical) (up/down), while [horizontal scaling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalability#Horizontal) (out/in) refers to the ability of adding additional nodes to the system.
Following paragraphs discuss the common concepts for applying `horizontal scaling` (e.g. scaling out or shared nothing) to streaming data pipelines.

[Stream processing](%currentPath%/concepts/streams/) in Spring Cloud Data Flow is implemented architecturally as a collection of independent event-driven streaming applications that connect using a messaging middleware of choice, for example RabbitMQ or Apache Kafka. The collection of independent applications come together at runtime to constitute a streaming data pipeline.

> The ability of a streaming pipeline to cope with increased data load depends on the following characteristics:

Reviewer: "data pipeline" whenever possible for consistency (folks get it confused with CI pipeline)

- _Messaging Middleware_ - [data partitioning](https://docs.spring.io/spring-cloud-stream/docs/current/reference/htmlsingle/#partitioning) is a widely used technique for scaling the messaging middleware infrastructure. Spring Cloud Data Flow through Spring Cloud Stream, it provides excellent support for [streaming partitioning](%currentPath%/feature-guides/streams/partitioning/#data-partitioning/).

- _Event-driven Applications_ - Spring Cloud Stream provides support for data processing in parallel with multiple consumer instances, which is commonly referred to as application scaling.

Following diagram illustrates a typical scale-out architecture based on data partitioning and application parallelism:

![SCDF Stream Scaling](images/scdf-stream-partition-and-scaling-overview.png)

> Platforms such as Kubernetes and Cloud Foundry offer scaling features for the Operators teams to control system’s load. For example Operators can leverage [CF Scale](https://docs.cloudfoundry.org/devguide/deploy-apps/cf-scale.html), [scale applications](https://docs.spring.io/spring-cloud-dataflow/docs/2.3.0.RELEASE/reference/htmlsingle/#configuration-cloudfoundry-scaling) or [Kubectl Scale](https://jamesdefabia.github.io/docs/user-guide/kubectl/kubectl_scale/) to scale applications manually or enable autoscaling features such as [App Autoscaler](https://docs.run.pivotal.io/appsman-services/autoscaler/using-autoscaler.html) for Cloud Foundry and [HPA](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/) and [KEDA](https://github.com/kedacore/keda) for Kubernetes. The autoscaling is usually controlled by CPU or memory limit thresholds (HPA) or message queues sizes (KEDA).

Reviewer: Oh, here I meant just remove the text  "(HPA)" "(KEDA)" from the sentence. They don't directly relate to the description, so it is confusing to see them in parens.

> Platforms such as Kubernetes and Cloud Foundry offer scaling features for the Operators to control system’s load. For example Operators can leverage [CF Scale](https://docs.cloudfoundry.org/devguide/deploy-apps/cf-scale.html), [scale applications](https://docs.spring.io/spring-cloud-dataflow/docs/2.3.0.RELEASE/reference/htmlsingle/#configuration-cloudfoundry-scaling) or [Kubectl Scale](https://jamesdefabia.github.io/docs/user-guide/kubectl/kubectl_scale/) to scale applications manually or enable autoscaling features such as [App Autoscaler](https://docs.run.pivotal.io/appsman-services/autoscaler/using-autoscaler.html) for Cloud Foundry and [HPA](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/) and [KEDA](https://github.com/kedacore/keda) for Kubernetes. The autoscaling is usually controlled by CPU or memory limit thresholds (HPA) or message queues sizes (KEDA).

Reviewer: > .. enable autoscaling features with the help of [App Autoscaler] ...

Reviewer: > (HPA) or message queues sizes (KEDA).

let's remove the HPA and KEDA from the sentence

> Platforms such as Kubernetes and Cloud Foundry offer scaling features for the Operators to control system’s load. For example Operators can leverage [CF Scale](https://docs.cloudfoundry.org/devguide/deploy-apps/cf-scale.html), [scale applications](https://docs.spring.io/spring-cloud-dataflow/docs/2.3.0.RELEASE/reference/htmlsingle/#configuration-cloudfoundry-scaling) or [Kubectl Scale](https://jamesdefabia.github.io/docs/user-guide/kubectl/kubectl_scale/) to scale applications manually enable autoscaling features with the help of [App Autoscaler](https://docs.run.pivotal.io/appsman-services/autoscaler/using-autoscaler.html) for Cloud Foundry and [HPA](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/) and [KEDA](https://github.com/kedacore/keda) for Kubernetes. The autoscaling is usually controlled by CPU or memory limit thresholds or message queues sizes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Platforms such as Kubernetes and Cloud Foundry offer scaling features for the Operators to control system’s load. For example, Operators can leverage [cf scale](https://docs.cloudfoundry.org/devguide/deploy-apps/cf-scale.html) to [scale applications](https://docs.spring.io/spring-cloud-dataflow/docs/2.3.0.RELEASE/reference/htmlsingle/#configuration-cloudfoundry-scaling) in Cloud Foundry and likewise, use the [kubectl scale](https://jamesdefabia.github.io/docs/user-guide/kubectl/kubectl_scale/) to scale applications in Kubernetes. It is also possible to enable autoscaling features with the help of [App Autoscaler](https://docs.run.pivotal.io/appsman-services/autoscaler/using-autoscaler.html) in Cloud Foundry and [HPA](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/) or [KEDA](https://github.com/kedacore/keda) in Kubernetes respectively. The autoscaling is usually determined by the CPU or memory limit thresholds or message queue-depth and topic-offset-lag metrics.
```
```

While the scaling happens outside of the Spring Cloud Data Flow, the applications that are scaled can react to and handle the upstream load automatically. Developers only need to configure the message partitioning using properties such as [partitionKeyExpression](https://cloud.spring.io/spring-cloud-static/spring-cloud-stream/3.0.0.RELEASE/reference/html/spring-cloud-stream.html#spring-cloud-stream-overview-configuring-output-bindings-partitioning) and [partitionCount](https://cloud.spring.io/spring-cloud-static/spring-cloud-stream/3.0.0.RELEASE/reference/html/spring-cloud-stream.html#spring-cloud-stream-overview-configuring-output-bindings-partitioning).

> In addition to the platform specific, low-level APIs, Spring Cloud Data Flow provides a dedicated, Scale API, designed for scaling data pipelines. Later provides an uniform way to leverage the platform scaling capabilities from within custom Spring applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the platform specific, low-level APIs, Spring Cloud Data Flow provides a dedicated, Scale API, designed for scaling data pipelines. The Scale API provides a uniform way to leverage the platform scaling capabilities from within custom Spring applications.
```

> In addition to the platform specific, low-level APIs, Spring Cloud Data Flow provides a dedicated, Scale API, designed for scaling data pipelines. The Scale API provides a uniform way to leverage the platform scaling capabilities from within custom Spring applications.

Reviewer: > The Scale API provides a uniform way to leverage the platform scaling capabilities from within custom Spring applications.

Not sure I follow this. Esp. the "from within custom Spring applications". It makes it sound that the scaling is happening inside the custom applications.

Author: I see you point. My intention is to stress that the Scale API still uses (internally) the native scaling capabilities of the different platforms but exposes in a single, unified interface. Perhaps something like?
> The Scale API unifies the various platforms native scaling capabilities into a uniform and simple interface.
